'''document status''': {{irdoc-final}}

==Summary==
A provider outage on our primary transport link between eqiad and codfw caused it to be in a constant flapping (going down and up) state.

This flapping caused routing re-convergence churn and packet loss between the two sites.

On the application level, this translated to elevated 5xx/s from Varnish from ulsfo, eqsin, and codfw from 21:20 to 21:55 UTC.  Varnish reported "No backend" for many of the requests.  Host checks in Icinga were flapping "TTL exceeded" and service checks flapping "No route to host."

===Impact===
Surfaced a bit more than 52,000 5xx responses.

https://grafana.wikimedia.org/d/000000479/frontend-traffic?panelId=2&fullscreen&from=1566594998796&to=1566597283616&var-status_type=5

===Detection===
Monitoring caught and reported the issue via SmokePing and Icinga.

== Timeline==

'''All times in UTC.'''

*2019-08-23 21:20 '''OUTAGE BEGINS'''
*21:25 Investigation begins
*21:33 Zayo (the link's provider) reports issue with service (email unnoticed)
*Lots of errors and recoveries - flapping
*21:41 Arzhel starts investigating
*21:46 Brandon called
*21:47 Decided to depool codfw (ended up not needing it)
*21:48 Arzhel promotes backup link to primary
*21:55 '''OUTAGE ENDS'''
*2019-08-25 01:37 Link stops flapping

==Conclusions==
=== What went well?===

*The root cause was quickly worked-around once the cause (network link) was identified.

===What went poorly?===

*Due to the frequency of the flapping Icinga checks for link status, OSPF and BFD didn't trigger, causing SREs to think of an application layer issue
*The work-around (failing over to the backup link) is not documented and requires Netops to be done.
*Nothing paged even though it had user facing impact

===Where did we get lucky?===

*Giuseppe, and Filippo responded outside of their office hours.

===How many people were involved in the remediation? ===

*No Incident coordinator appointed - 5 SREs

==Links to relevant documentation==

*[[Global traffic routing#Disabling a Site 2]]
*[[Network monitoring#OSPF status]]

==Actionables==
'''NOTE''': Please add the [[phab:tag/wikimedia-incident/|#wikimedia-incident]] Phabricator project to these follow-up tasks and move them to the "follow-up/actionable" column.

*Those two will help mitigate the consequences of an overly flapping link:
**Configure interface damping on primary links - [[phab:T196432|T196432]]
**ospf link-protection - [[phab:T167306|T167306]]
*This one will make it easier (down the road) to a non-netops to failover a link if the need arises:
**Configuration management for network operations - [[phab:T228388|T228388]]
*This one is about having better monitoring and alerting by replacing Smokeping by something Prometheus based
**Investigate/setup prometheus blackbox_exporter - [[phab:T169860|T169860]]
* 

{{#ifeq:{{SUBPAGENAME}}|Report Template||
[[Category:Incident documentation]]
}}